# Lecture 11: Contemporary Issues in Business Intelligence

## Agenda

- Contemporary Issues for Data Warehousing and Business Intelligence
  - Business Analytics
  - Big Data
  - Self-Service Business Intelligence
  - Cloud Data Warehousing and Business Intelligence
  - Mobile BI
  - Narrative BI
- Comparing Management Theory with the BI Vendor Perspective

## Contemporary Issues for Data Warehousing and Business Intelligence

### Business Analytics

#### What is "Analytics"?

- Short-hand for "Business Analytics" and defined as

  > "...the extensive use of data, statistical and quantitative analysis,
  > explanatory and predictive models, and fact-based management to drive
  > decisions and actions." (Davenport and Harris, 2007 p.7)

- Analytics became popular after Davenport's 2006 HBR article, and Davenport and
  Harris' 2007 book.
- Little peer reviewed empirical research to support claims made about benefits
  of "Analytics".
- Some early research suggests that managers don't understand output from
  business analytics.

#### Analytics vs Business Intelligence

- Davenport and Harris state that:

  > "...analytics are a subset of what has become to be called business
  > intelligence" (2007)

- Business analytics is not new
  - Price drops in hardware and software has made the technology that enables
    "Analytics" more accessible to more organisations.
- Many (former) business intelligence vendors now refer to themselves as
  business analytics vendors

#### Analytics and the DW/BI Practitioner

- In reality not much changes. "Analytics" is primarily "old wine in new
  bottles". Remember
  - Management IS -> Executive IS -> Enterprise IS -> Business Intelligence ->
    Business Analytics
- Analytics are still DDS, therefore decision-centred design,
  adaptive/evolutionary development methods, data visualisation techniques, good
  data governance, etc. still apply.
- There is concern about user of the output of analytics being able to interpret
  it correctly.
  - Practitioners can help fill the "interpretation gap."

### Big Data

#### What is Big Data? (The 3, 4 or more Vs)

- In 2001 Doug Laney, a Meta Group analyst, wrote about the data management
  challenges facing business in terms of Volume, Velocity, and Variety.
- Laney and Bayer (2012) formalised the definition:

  > "Big data is high **volume**, high **velocity**, and / or high **variety**
  > information assets that require new forms of processing to enable enhanced
  > decision making, insight discovery and process optimisation."

#### Big Data and Technology

- Big Data is generated by very large businesses and high-throughput
  transactional processes.
  - Social media streams, telephone call data records, clickstream logs,
    environmental sensors, machine sensors, retail sales transactions.
- Big Data is stored in distributed computing clusters using software /
  technologies such as:
  - Hadoop, Hbase, MapReduce, MongoDB, CouchDB
- Big Data is usually not stored in a relational database format
  - NoSQL or key-value pair databases
  - Some Big Data technology now has SQL drivers

#### Big Data and the DW / BI Practitioner

- Some vendors claim that Big Data will replace data warehousing. Data
  warehousing is concept or process. Big Data is just another data source.
- Some Big Data can be semi- or un-structured (e.g. medical records, documents,
  etc.). The challenge is to work out how to integrate it into the data
  warehouse.
- Very large data sets require innovative presentation and visualisation
  techniques.

#### How Do Hype Cycles Work?

Each Hype Cycle drills down into the five key phases of a technology's life
cycle.

Technology Trigger:

: A potential technology breakthrough kicks things off. Early proof-of-concept
stories and media interest trigger significant publicity. Often no usable
products exist and commercial viability is unproven.

Peak of Inflated Expectations:

: Early publicity produces a number of success stories -- often accompanies by
scores of failures. Some companies take action; many do not.

Trough of Disillusionment:

: Interest decreases as experiments and implementations fail to deliver.
Producers of the technology shake out or fail. Investments continue only if the
surviving providers improve their products to the satisfaction of early
adopters.

Scope of Enlightenment:

: More instances of how the technology can benefit the enterprise start to
crystallise and become more widely understood. Second- and third-generation
products appear from technology providers. Most enterprises fund pilots;
conservative companies remain cautious.

Plateau of Productivity:

: Mainstream adoption starts to take off. Criteria for assessing provider
viability are more clearly defined. The technology's broad market applicability
and relevance are clearly paying off.

### Self-Service Business Intelligence

#### What is Self-Service BI?

- An approach to BI that provides business users with tools and infrastructure
  to create reports and perform data analysis without a need to rely on IT
  department.
- It is based on a "just give them access to everything they will ever need and
  they'll be satisfied" approach to business intelligence.
  - Ackoff (1978) says that approach does not work.
- It is a response to too long to deliver / never delivered DW and BI projects.
- Unfortunately it is harder to deliver than it sounds.

#### Successful Self-Service BI Requirements

- A deep understanding of user requirements
  - This is not often done. No need to understand requirements if we're giving
    them everything.
- Intuitive and east to user end-user tools
  - Most BI tools, even today, most are not intuitive and easy to use. Adequate
    training is not often provided.
- Users must understand data structures and analysis methods
  - This requires well-written business meta-data and training. Rarely either of
    these are done well.
- Provision of new data must be timely.
  - Slow IT delivery problem has not gone away.

#### Self-Service BI and the DW / BI Practitioner

- Self-Service BI can be done well BUT simply making data accessible is not
  enough.
- Theories and concepts such as evolutionary / adaptive development, cognitive
  fit, etc. still apply.
- Training users in not only use of the software but also the data structures,
  analysis and visualisation methods, etc. is even more important.
- Having good report governance processes in place are vital prevent "report
  bloat" and the spread of incorrect reports.

### Cloud Data Warehousing and Business Intelligence

#### What is Cloud DW and BI?

- DW and BI delivered as software-as-a-service
  - Data mart data is stored in a remote managed server.
  - BI application delivered to user via a web browser.
- Cloud DW and BI is becoming more popular
  - Increased confidence in the cloud - SalesForce effect
  - Lower cost - Only pay for space and user access
  - Faster deployment - Often no need to involve IT
  - Greater use of other cloud-based services means source systems are now also
    in the cloud
- Still limited in terms of scale and functionality
  - Only relatively small volumes of data can be stored.
  - Automated data modelling can limit analysis options.

#### Cloud DW / BI and the DW / BI Practitioner

- Need to be aware that these systems are being implemented.
  - Some departments just do it consciously exclude IT
- Similar problems to those faced by self-service BI implementations
  - Inadequate meta-data, application training and user analysis and reporting
    skills.
- The generic nature of standard data models applied means data mart may not
  exactly match user / business requirements.
  - Opportunity to customise data model and reports.

### Mobile Business Intelligence

#### What is Mobile BI and Who Uses It?

- Making available BI content on mobile computing devices such as mobile phones
  and tablets.
- Often part of cloud BI but can a feature of on-premises BI
- Most often used operational employees in the field (e.g. service technician,
  sales people, etc.)
- Executives and senior managers are starting to use mobile BI because they are
  replacing a laptop with a tablet computer.
- Vendors are promoting mobile BI as the solution to the BI usage problem.

#### Mobile BI and the DW / BI Practitioner

- Again all the same theories and concepts apply
- Usability and content design are vitally important
  - User will have much higher expectations because of experience with
    well-designed iOS/Android apps.
- Choose mobile BI solutions wisely.
  - Not all mobile BI implementations are created equally. Some are little more
    than a wrapper on a web page.
- Beware of mobile data coverage
  - In Australia mobile data coverage can be patchy outside of metropolitan
    areas. If required choose a product that allows off-line caching of data.

### Narrative Business Intelligence

#### What is Narrative BI?

- Narrative BI extends the traditional BI output of tables, charts, reports, and
  dashboards to include a narrative or description that supports the data.
- It has become more popular in recent as a result of the rise of "data
  journalism" and infographics.
- It is not that new in organisations. Business users frequently include tables
  and charts in PowerPoint slides and with descriptive commentary.
- A number of vendors have added narrative BI to their products
  - e.g. Yellowfin (Storyboards), Tableau (Storypoints)

#### Narrative BI and the DW / BI Practitioner

- Narrative BI is a relatively new feature in BI software. Usability of the
  feature varies greatly across the vendors.
- It is unclear if the feature is the next BI gimmick
- Some preliminary empirical research suggests that a narrative presentation of
  information to a decision maker is important to help them understand the
  context of the results.
- This is particularly true for statistical results from business analytics.

## Comparing Management Theory with the BI Vendor Perspective

### Overview of Research Done

- Content analysis of vendor literature
  - Blog posts, white papers, and marketing brochures
  - Author needs to be a vendor or representative
  - Vendor must have BI product-license revenue greater than US\$15 million,
    significant revenue growth and be included in Gartner's BI Platforms Magic
    Quadrant.
  - 103 documents from 11 different vendors.
- Compared vendor perspective to well-studied management theories:
  - Dynamic Capability
  - Absorptive Capacity

### Summary of Vendors' Perspective

- Two broad sub-themes
  - Improving the decision process
  - Improving decision-maker insight
- Little insight into _how_ to achieve transformation through BI
- The nature of transformation tends to focus on increased speed of decision
  making, collaboration and iniquitous access to BI services, giving access to
  more information.

### Problems with Vendors' Perspective

- Faster decision making is not always better
  - Sometimes speed can lead to a worse outcome
- Collaboration may be useful, but depends on the kind of decision.
- Ubiquitous access seems to be more about selling more software licenses.
- Information challenges faced by decision-makers are not necessarily about
  access
  - Information overload, sense-making, etc.

### The Two Management Theories

- Dynamic Capabilities
  - The operational capabilities that offer decision-makers paths through
    building, integrating and reconfiguring processes in the firm to handle
    dynamic markets to deliver sustained competitive advantage.
  - BI is a capability that supports other capabilities in a firm.
- Absorptive Capacity
  - Ability of a firm to realise sustained competitive advantage through the
    capacity to acquire, assimilate and exploit new knowledge, skills and
    techniques.

### Comparing the Two Perspectives

- The two management theories offer a rich level of insight into the
  possibilities that BI can offer, but also the rich, complex and nuanced
  interacting factors in transforming organisations.
- Vendor literature is extremely narrow, technically focused on speed, access
  to, and quantity of, information
  - Implicit assertion that faster decisions relying on more information are
    inherently better decisions.
- The data-oriented view of problems facing decision-makers help by BI vendors
  does not necessarily address the knowledge-oriented problems decision-makers
  may actually face.
- The vendor marketing message largely glosses over or ignores the complexities
  of successful deployment and use of their products.

### What is the Impact for the BI Practitioner?

- Be mindful that senior IT and other managers will have the vendor's view of BI
  - What more can you expect when they are bombarded with well-crafted,
    synchronised marketing messages?
- There is an opportunity for you to expand the knowledge of senior IT and other
  managers
  - They may know the "what" and "why" about BI but you need help them better
    understand the "how"
  - Subtlety may be required but it can be done.
- Read and / or listen to vendor material critically
  - Always compare what they say with the theories, concepts and principles you
    have learned.

## Summary

- The DW and BI marketers are telling us about the many new technologies they
  offer.
- The reality is that some of those technologies are genuinely new while other
  are just existing technologies with a new name.
- Whether the technology be new or old, applying the core theories, concepts and
  principles of DW and BI will always increase chances of success.
- Read vendor and consultant marketing material critically
  - Their objective often is to sell products and services
